This animation explains requirements for protruding
objects in the ADA and ABA Standards.
Objects that protrude into circulation paths
from walls or posts can be hazardous to people
with vision impairments. Common examples include
shelves, sconces, signs, kiosks, drinking
fountains, and monitors. The ADA and ABA Standards
set limits on the projection of such objects
depending on their mounting height.
Since people with vision impairments may not
need to travel along accessible routes, requirements
for protruding objects apply to all circulation
paths, including inaccessible routes. Unlike
most other provisions in the standards, they
are not limited to accessible routes or spaces
and encompass all ways of passage for pedestrian
travel, including walks, hallways, stairways,
ramps, elevators and lifts, and courtyards.
The requirements apply to the entire width
of circulation paths. Both interior and exterior
circulation paths are covered by these provisions.
People who are blind or who have low vision
sometimes travel along walls for orientation
or wayfinding, particularly in unfamiliar
environments. This technique is known as “trailing”
or “shorelining.” Objects that protrude
into circulation paths from walls, columns,
and other surfaces that are above the standard
sweep of long canes are hazardous unless properly
treated.
Objects that are mounted above a height of
80 inches provide minimum headroom clearance
and can protrude any amount.
Those with leading edges at or below 27 inches
above the floor or ground can project any
distance from wall surfaces because they can
be detected by long canes without body contact.
Providing detectability at heights well below
27 inches will allow more response time, especially
for people of short stature, children, and
users of short canes.
Protruding objects with leading edges above
27 inches but no more than 80 inches high
are within the hazard zone. They are limited
to a protrusion of 4 inches or, in the case
of handrails, 4 ½ inches. Objects in this
range that exceed this limit must be properly
treated so that they do not pose safety hazards.
One option for elements not required to be
within reach is to locate them so that they
provide a headroom clearance of at least 80
inches. Examples include signs not required
to be tactile and sconces.
Another solution is to limit an object’s
projection into circulation paths to 4 inches,
such as a counter at a service window. Or
the counter can be partially enclosed so that
it is detectable within the 27” high maximum
cane sweep. The leading edge of the counter
cannot project more than 4 inches from the
detectable portion that is within cane sweep.
A side approach for wheelchair access is permitted
to sales and service counters. However, at
other elements where a forward approach is
required or preferred, solutions cannot obstruct
required clearances for knees and toes. Side
panels provide a solution that will accommodate
access for a forward approach.
In all cases, solutions must be fixed or built-in
so that they remain reliably in place. In
new construction and alterations, moveable
elements or furnishings are not acceptable
alternatives in treating protruding objects.
Extended wall surfaces and fixed cabinets
or enclosures below protruding objects can
be used at other elements such as monitors.
Treatments must extend to within 4 inches
of the leading edge of the protrusion.
Note that some solutions may impact the height
of operable parts or controls that are required
to be within accessible reach range. The maximum
height is reduced when the reach extends over
an obstruction beyond a certain depth.
Another option is to recess objects so that
the projection into circulation paths does
not exceed 4 inches. This is often a good
solution for cabinets, shelves, and display
cases.
Fixtures such as cantilevered drinking fountains
can be recessed in alcoves. Fixed objects
such as benches, planters, or partitions can
be used to recess objects and to provide barriers
on both sides of a protruding object. When
recessing other types of elements in alcoves,
be sure to accommodate the clear floor space
that is required for wheelchair access.
Wheelchair accessible drinking fountains must
provide a knee clearance at least 27 inches
high. If they are located so they provide,
but do not exceed, this clearance, they do
not require treatment as a protruding object
since the leading edge is on the boundary
of cane detection. Wheelchair accessible units
or bowls providing a knee clearance of exactly
27 inches can be used to enclose one side
of cantilevered drinking fountains that are
above the 27 inch height to serve standees.
These requirements are not limited to wall-mounted
objects. They also apply to objects mounted
to partitions, columns, counters, and other
elements such as standpipes. Stand-alone objects
that are fixed or built-in are covered as
well where they protrude into circulation
paths. Examples include some types of kiosks
and sculptures.
In the case of a fixed sculpture, a platform
or base can be used to provide cane detectability
at hazardous protrusions. The platform or
base should be high enough so that it is not
mistaken for a curb or step. A height of about
a foot will be sufficient, although the standards
do not specify a minimum. Railings and similar
elements that provide a leading edge no higher
than 27 inches also can be used. Barriers
or bases must extend to within 4 inches of
protrusions in the hazard zone. Even better,
consider extending them up to or beyond the
leading edge of hazardous protrusions.
The standards also address protruding objects
mounted on posts or pylons, such as signs.
As with wall-mounted objects, restrictions
apply to objects with leading edges within
the 27 inch to 80 inch height range. These
objects, however, are limited to a 12 inch
protrusion into circulation paths.
It is advisable to limit their projection
to 4 inches as is required for wall-mounted
objects. A 4 inch limit is also specified
for post-mounted or free-standing objects
along streets and sidewalks in new guidelines
the Board is developing for public rights-of-ways.
At an element such as a map or display on
posts, compliance can be achieved by limiting
projections from posts to 12 inches. Leading
edges located within 27 inches from the floor,
like a horizontal rail, also will suffice
in providing detectability within cane sweep.
If the object is mounted so that the leading
edge is no higher than 27 inches, no additional
treatment is required. Maintaining a 27 inch
clearance will accommodate knee clearance
which is important where forward approach
access to an element is required. In this
case, such clearance will provide a closer
approach for wheelchair access to the display.
These requirements apply to all sides of an
object that can be approached from circulation
paths.
Headroom clearance of at least 80 inches is
required along all circulation paths.
Objects suspended from ceilings or mounted
on walls cannot protrude into this minimum
clearance.
Treatments for detectability are required
where the vertical clearance along circulation
paths is less than 80 inches, such as below
stairways that are not enclosed. This can
be achieved with fixed or built-in objects
like planters, benches, railings, and other
elements that provide an effective barrier.
Platforms or similar treatments should be
high enough so that they are not mistaken
for a step. It is important that solutions
be designed so that they do not pose tripping
hazards.
These requirements also apply to curved or
sloped walls that reduce vertical clearance
below 80 inches along circulation paths. When
railings are used, they must be mounted so
that they provide a defined and detectable
edge that is located no more than 27 inches
high.
In the case of sloped walls, if the depth
does not exceed 4 inches up to a height of
80 inches, further treatment is not required.
Otherwise if the depth exceeds 4 inches, railings
or other barriers are must be provided.
Further guidance on protruding objects and
other requirements in the ADA and ABA Standards
is available from the U.S. Access Board.
This animation was developed by the U.S. Access
Board in cooperation with the Federal agencies
that issue the ADA and ABA Standards.